>>While Peter
Russell's background
is in mathematics and
theoretical physics,
it was unanswered questions
in both these arenas
that dropped him onto his
path of enlightenment.
This took him to
India, where he studied
meditation and
Eastern philosophy.
Once he had some time to
synthesize all these aspects
of life, he came to some
profound conclusions that we
cannot continue on our current
path of greed and environmental
degradation and expect any kind
of future of abundance and joy.
We need to dig down to the roots
of what true fulfillment is
and begin living
it, as we repair
the damage we've done
to our host, the Earth.
He is a gentle soul
with twinkling eyes,
and the depth of his profundity
has been expressed best
by Buzzword Magazine, in which
he was dubbed Eco Philosopher
Extraordinaire.
Meet Peter Russell.
And one of the areas
you were talking about
is paradigm shift, an existing
paradigm encounters an anomaly.
And so, what do you consider,
at this point in time,
the anomaly that is facing us?
>>Right.
Well, the anomaly is to
the current great worldview
of modern science, which
is that space, time,
and matter are real.
That's the current
worldview paradigm.
The one great problem that
that cannot explain is
consciousness, the very
fact we have awareness.
According to the modern
scientific viewpoint,
we should all be zomboids.
We should all just-- all
that function should go on,
but there's no
reason whatsoever why
we should ever have awareness.
And yet awareness, experience,
is the only thing we cannot
doubt.
I can never doubt I'm conscious.
And that's the great paradox
which science cannot explain.
As with any anomaly,
what happens is
the scientists try to explain
it in terms of the old paradigm.
And that's what happened
with Copernicus.
Well, before Copernicus, they
couldn't explain the planets,
but they kept on trying.
They assumed the Earth was at
the center of the universe,
and they kept on coming up
with all these complex circles
rolling around circles, until
eventually Copernicus came up
with a new model we have
today of the Earth spinning
around the Sun.
The same is happening
with consciousness.
Because everybody's
totally fixed on matter
as the ultimate
reality, they're trying
to explain how consciousness
could possibly come out
of matter, and they're
getting nowhere.
They've got theories in
quantum physics that try,
theories in formation sciences,
chemical theories, nothing
works.
But nobody dares
question the assumption,
and the assumption is that
matter is unconscious.
And that's the problem.
If matter is unconscious,
the problem is how on Earth
does consciousness,
awareness, ever arise out
of something that
has no awareness?
>>You're a physicist
and a mathematician,
and I believe you've been
involved in the computer
sciences as well.
>>Yes.
>>Very heavily steeped in
the left brain and science--
>>Part of me.
>>Part of-- yes.
Part of you.
Why is the scientific community
so frightened of this anomaly,
so to speak, this new knowledge?
>>I think it's not so
much they're frightened,
they're stuck.
We get stuck in a worldview, and
I think our views of the world
are the hardest
things to change.
We can change where we live,
we can change our jobs,
we can change our partners,
we can change everything.
But when you're changing
our fundamental belief
about reality, it's
very, very difficult.
In fact, Max Planck,
the physicist,
said that new ideas
catch on in science
not because people
change their minds,
but the old scientists die out
and it takes a new generation
to bring in the new idea.
So it's not that
they're frightened,
it's just they're rigid.
They only see it
this way and they
can't believe
anything else is true.
And a case of that I
came across recently
was with near-death experiences.
This neuropsychologist
was asked to look
at some evidence for near-death
experience and he refused to.
He said, why should I waste
my time reading something
which I know is impossible?
Which is just like
in Galileo's time,
the bishops refusing to look
down Galileo's telescope
because what he was saying
they knew was impossible.
And that's what happens.
We refuse to consider it.
>>So what happens now?
We're at a very tender
and very critical
point in history in
terms of our ecosystems,
and not only that,
our technology
outstripping our wisdom.
Do we wait for them to die?
What is-- what are we
handing to the young people
at this very time?
>>Well, it is dying.
You see, the new
generation is coming along
with the new ideas.
It's happening.
When I talk to younger people,
I find they're with it.
They know what
I'm talking about.
They understand
about conscience.
They don't believe in the old
materialistic paradigm so much.
So the new generation
is coming in.
We don't have to wait 100
years for people to die,
it's already happening.
This process is happening.
>>So for the people
in their 20s,
they understand that
this is happening.
Functionally speaking,
we have work to do.
What would you suggest is
the first point of what
needs being done?
>>I think the first
thing we need to do
is to see that the real issue
facing humanity is basically
a spiritual issue, an
issue of consciousness,
an issue of values.
All the problems
that are out there
whether it's
environmental problems,
whether it's social
problems, whether it's
our own personal problems,
when we look at them
they all come back in the
end to human thinking,
human consciousness, human
values, human decisions.
What we tend to
do in our society
is look out there
and try to solve
the problem, which is important.
If there's a problem with the
environment like global warming
or destruction of
the ozone layer,
yes, we need to
look to that problem
and see what we can do
to stop it, to change it.
But at the same time,
we have to say, OK,
what is it in human
consciousness that
allows us to behave this way?
Because in some
ways, we're insane.
We like to think of ourselves
as an intelligent species,
but a species which
can understand it's
destroying its environment,
and if it continues to do it,
it may not be here 10,
20, 30 years' time,
and then continues with the
very same activities that
are destroying the environment.
It's insane.
And so we need to look at that.
What is it?
What is making us insane?
What is causing us to behave
in ways that are killing us?
And we don't look at that.
We always look at just
solving one problem then
another problem, and
we're just fighting fires,
never looking at what is
it that's causing this.
And I think the root reason
is because we're out of touch
with ourselves.
We're caught up in this
materialistic mindset that
basically says if you're not
at peace, if you're not happy,
do something.
There's something wrong
with the outside world.
You need to buy something,
get something, go somewhere,
change your circumstances.
And, you know, that
works in the short term.
You go and buy something,
you feel a bit better
for a little while, and
then you feel bad again.
And this is what keeps
us consuming, consuming,
consuming, consuming.
What we need to
realize, I think,
on a large scale is
that the real problem is
an inner problem.
And then we can begin
looking at what that is
and how to free
ourselves from it.
And I think that's what all the
great spiritual traditions have
been on that for
thousands of years.
They come from people
who've realized
there's another way of being,
another mode of consciousness.
That we can free ourselves
up from this attachment,
this materiality.
And when we do that, we
begin to become more in tune
with our world, with our
environment, with other people.
We become more compassionate.
And they've all developed
various techniques, practices,
exercises, which help liberate
the mind, to free the mind.
So I think the next
stage is having realized
that's the basic
problem, is then say, OK,
what do we know just
looking at the world's
spiritual traditions and other
metaphysical traditions, what
do we know that can really help
free up human consciousness
and have-- what I
would like to see
is an outfit called the
Inner Manhattan Project.
Just as the original
Manhattan Project
recognized there was
this incredible potential
in the nucleus of the
atom and they then
got together and turned it
into an atomic bomb, which
wasn't necessarily such a good
idea, but the principal is,
everybody got together
to solve a problem.
And I think we could
do the same recognizing
this incredible potential in
human consciousness, which
is not being accessed at the
moment and that that-- in that
is our salvation.
And if we worked on that
collectively-- if institutions,
individuals, organizations,
whatever, made
that a real focus, I
think in a very short time
we could actually have
processes, techniques,
things we could
disseminate to the public
which would really
encourage that awakening
of consciousness.
>>So if you're
speaking to someone
who's 22 years old that
are out in cyber world
and they're just looking for
another chat room or something
intriguing out there, what do
you say to them very directly
to make them even care enough
to examine these ideas?
>>I think, what
do we really want?
What is each of us looking
for in the final analysis?
We're looking to
feel OK in ourselves.
We're looking to feel more at
ease, satisfied, fulfilled,
at peace.
There's many different things.
But basically,
what we're looking
for is an inner state of being.
And whether we do that
through going to the movies,
buying things, eating food,
being in a chat discussion
with somebody, whatever it is,
engaged in some game that's
really stimulating, grabbing
us, or just mind-blowing
visuals, whatever it is,
we're all looking, ultimately,
for an inner state.
But if we get too caught up
in looking for it out there,
we get attached to the process.
And so if it's being in a
certain conversation that
does it, we become
dependent upon that.
And I think what all the
traditions are saying,
there's a way to access
that in ourselves
whereby we don't
become dependent
upon the circumstances
out there.
So it's about finding
an unconditional peace,
an unconditional ease that
we can take around with us.
So rather than being out there
looking for something when
we don't have it,
feeling badly, then
going off getting our
next fix, whether it's
a cyber fix or a chemical fix,
it's all the same pattern.
We're finding a fix,
and then feeling bad
and looking for something else.
If you can discover
that to yourself,
that deeper sense of
ease, which is just
an unconditional
satisfaction, then I
think one feels much
more at home in the world
and you're not having to take
from the world the whole time.
And I also think
you're-- it feeds back
into our relationships.
I think we're better
able to relate to people
if we're in a more centered,
at home state in ourselves.
>>So this is not simply a
woo-woo metaphysical concept
anymore.
This is a reality
that is dawning,
and really, perhaps,
the only path
to taking the next
step as a civilization
without doing ourselves and
the planet further harm.
>>I think it's an absolutely
essential aspect of the path.
I do want to emphasize that.
And we do need to stop
a lot of the things that
are going on that are
creating more of a mess.
And at the same time,
we have to include
this aspect of awakening
ourselves, freeing ourselves
from the patterns, the
mindsets, the assumptions,
the conditioning that causes
us to behave in that way.
But we need both together.
So I would say it's an
absolutely critical part.
If we don't have
that, we're just
going to continue the mess
until we're no longer here.
>>My question is, what becomes
our responsibility then?
Once you understand
consciousness is everything,
then what becomes
our responsibility
in reacting to
that knowledge that
can't be denied any further?
>>I think once we
realize that-- I mean,
everything is in consciousness.
And the first
thing to realize is
to take responsibility
for our own consciousness.
It's easy to say other
people must change,
but we're all part of
them, I'm part of them,
we must all change.
And the only person I really
have responsibility for
is myself.
It's how do I free myself
from outdated conditioning,
education, all that stuff?
And the nice thing about
that is the more I do that,
the better I feel.
The more at ease I feel.
And the key thing
is when we realize
that everything we experience
is our own creation-- I
have to say we experience.
I want to make
clear I'm not saying
the external physical
reality is our own creation,
although some people say
that, I'm not saying that.
What I'm saying
is our perception
of the external reality
is our own creation.
Everything we know is in
our own consciousness,
and that means all
the interpretations
we lay upon it are in
our own consciousness.
Everything we see
about things, the way
we judge things is
all in the mind.
To realize that the way
we feel, very often,
is the result of our
own interpretation
and what we lay on a situation.
For example, if you
get caught and you're
standing in line in
a queue somewhere,
it's very easy to get upset
thinking, I'm going to be late
or I'm being delayed.
This is wasting my time.
And that stupid
person in front of me,
whether it's in a checkout
line at the supermarket
or waiting for the theater or
in a traffic jam, to realize we
are making ourselves upset
because of how we're seeing it.
Somebody else could be sitting
in exactly the situation,
standing in the same line,
and saying, this is wonderful.
I've got a couple of
moments to myself.
Nobody's bothering me.
Exactly the same situation,
two different reactions.
And I think-- this I often
call Spirituality 101,
is realizing that
we have a choice.
At every single
moment of our lives,
we have a choice about
how we see things.
We can either see things
through the eyes of fear,
or we can see things as they
are in the present moment.
And it's a hard choice to make,
because most the time we're
so caught up with our
concerns, fear, worry,
what's going on inside our
heads, all of our thinking,
but in principle
that choice is there.
And I think part of our
practice is, whatever
we're doing, just
coming back and saying,
let me just experience
this moment.
And one way to do that is
just to come back to the body.
How's my body feel?
We get so caught
up in our heads,
whether it's-- all
our technology puts us
into our heads whether
it's reading, computers,
whatever it is, it
gets into the mind.
We're thinking,
working things out.
Language puts us in our heads.
Just stop and feel the body.
And there's so much going on
the body that we don't notice.
Just oh, how's it feeling?
Or there's the pressure of
the chair, there's my feet,
or there's my
breathing-- so much.
And 20 seconds later, you'll
be off in your head again.
But as a practice, to keep
coming back to the body,
coming back to the now,
coming back to the present
is exercising that choice
over how we see things
when we come back
to the present--
because the body is always in
the present, the experience
of the body.
The thoughts we have about the
body may not be in the present,
but the experience
of the body is always
in the present moment.
And that's the way to
exercise that choice,
to keep coming back.
How am I actually feeling
in my body right now?
If we just did that 50 times
a day for a few seconds,
our lives would start changing.
>>So how do we bridge
what some are terming--
there's even a
website now called
The Great Divide-- bridge the
consciousness that is coming
into our awareness, the
consciousness we're becoming
aware of, and our dependence
upon the world of science
and the PhDs of the
world telling us
what our reality should be.
There's a great chasm right now.
>>I think it's-- it's going to--
that divide is going to close
as we really begin to
understand consciousness.
I think, at the moment,
that divide is partly caused
by science in its
arrogance thinking
it can explain
consciousness away.
What all the great metaphysical
and spiritual traditions
have said is that
consciousness is
a fundamental quality
of the cosmos.
You can't explain
it away, it is.
It is the very nature of
things, consciousness.
When science begins to
see that-- and I think
it slowly is moving
that direction.
I go to conferences where I'm
finding scientists beginning
to stand up and a
few of them beginning
to talk about that and people
are debating and arguing,
but it's beginning
to be written about.
When people realize
that making that shift
doesn't actually threaten
anything at all in science,
all of biology, physics,
chemistry, mathematics
all works perfectly
well, but it starts
to change our whole
attitude to ourselves.
When we start seeing
consciousness in that way,
and I think what
we're going to see
is that divide between
science and spirituality
will begin to disappear.
Because I think the
spiritual traditions really
come from the
people who've chosen
to explore consciousness
first-hand.
And in the past, that's
been done typically
by people being in monasteries,
or going and sitting in caves,
or doing long
meditation practice.
And today, we have many
more ways of doing that.
Whether it's being in a
float tank, or psychedelics,
or there's many
different workshops,
people exploring
consciousness first hand,
and science hasn't
thought about that.
The way science
chooses to explore
consciousness is to, you know,
put electrodes on the brain
and have a guess at what's
happening inside the mind.
The only way to really
explore consciousness,
to explore awareness, is
to explore it first-hand.
Awareness is a
subjective phenomena.
You don't explore it
by studying matter.
You explore it by
getting in there,
observing your own awareness.
Self-observation,
self-realization,
self-knowledge.
It comes by watching the
mind, observing the mind.
Well, when I first
started getting interested
in spirituality was
back in the '60s.
I was a child of the
'60s-- not a child,
but I was heavily
involved in all
that was going on
in the '60s, and I
started getting interested in
meditation and spirituality
then.
But there was nothing
much around on it.
I went to my local
bookstore in Cambridge,
which was the second biggest
bookstore in England,
they had one shelf on sort of
alternative spiritual ideas.
And to see how things have
changed now 40 years later,
you go into any
modest-size town,
there's whole bookstores
devoted to spiritual stuff.
Often it's called New Age.
I hate the term New
Age, but alternative
thinking about consciousness
and expanding consciousness.
You look at the books on the
New York Times Bestseller List,
any week if you look at the top
10, three, four, five of them
are on consciousness,
spirituality
in one way or another.
That's what people
are fascinated by.
You look at the
number of yoga groups,
the number of organizations,
the number of workshops.
It's all been growing
exponentially since the '60s.
It got kicked off
in the '60s and it's
been expanding and
expanding and expanding.
And we're all learning
from each other.
In the past, if you were
interesting in raising
consciousness, you
might, if you were lucky,
have found somebody
in your community who
was a wise person who
could have helped you.
If you were lucky.
Today, we've got the literature
from all around the world,
from the past.
We can dig back into what the
Vedas were saying in India
5,000 years ago, what
Buddha was saying.
We can get videos
of what shamans
are teaching in South America.
We've got the whole of our
culture, spiritual teachings
on tap, both across space
and down through time.
Never has that been possible.
And so we are beginning
to see that common wisdom,
and we're beginning to bring
that wisdom into the light.
And there's more and more
and more people doing it.
In fact, somebody
asked me recently, they
said, what are you saying
that's different from what
everybody else is saying?
My response was,
nothing, I hope.
If there is, that's
where I'm wrong.
Because I think what's-- because
we're all learning from each
other.
I happen to write
books, but I learn
from people, other books or
people I chat to, whatever.
We're all learning
from each other.
So we are growing together.
So there is this
mass awakening that's
happening in our culture.
And the thing that really
brings that home to me
is when I talk to
younger people, people
in their teens, 20s, I
find there's as much wisdom
there as in anybody else
of any age on the planet.
And I might think because
I'm 40 years-- I've
been working on this 40
years longer than-- I've
been meditating that much
longer, I'm 40 years wiser.
I am 40 years wiser, but
so is everybody else.
We're all 40 years wiser.
And I think if you could take
some of the younger people
today who I see so
much wisdom there
that didn't exist in the '60s.
If I could take some of these
people in a time machine,
take them back into
the '60s, people
there would not know
what to make of them.
I mean, apart from
the fact no one
there had any
piercing or tattoos
or could ride
skateboards, but just
in terms of their understanding,
their wisdom, their compassion,
their vision of the world--
that didn't exist back then.
They'd be classed as some
weird, wise shaman, any kid
today back in the '60s.
That, to me, is a sign of the
times of how we have moved on.
And that process
is accelerating,
because whenever you
get collective learning,
you get feedback.
And it's not I am
learning on my own,
we're all learning together,
and that feedback always
produces acceleration.
It's like compound
interest in a bank.
The money keeps growing
faster, and faster, and faster.
This is compound interest
in consciousness,
because we are all
learning from each other.
And so we're growing
faster and faster.
And that's what gives
me hope for the future,
is we are in dire times,
severely critical times.
I don't know whether we're
going to make it or not.
It's touch and go.
But I know the only way
is through an awakening
and a liberation of
the human spirit.
That's the only way we're
going to get through this.
And that is happening
faster and faster.
I think there's one thing
that's important for everybody,
whatever our age, whatever
our culture, wherever
we are in history, and it's a
universal thing which comes up
time and time again, which,
put most simply, is be kind.
All the spiritual traditions
have it as the Golden Rule
and the basis of it is is
do as you would be done by.
None of us want to feel
conflicted or stressed
or whatever it is.
But what happens
is if you-- if I
get slightly aggrieved with you
over something you say or do,
what I tend to do is come
back attacking, criticizing
you or something.
I deliberately try
to make you feel bad.
And then you do feel bad,
and you come back at me
and deliberately try
to make me feel bad.
And we get caught in this
stupid vicious circle where
the game is I think if I'm
a little bit nasty to you,
you might wake up, realize
the error of your ways
and be nice to me.
But you're doing the same
thing and you're thinking,
if I'm just a little bit
nasty and mean to him,
he'll be nice to me,
and it doesn't work.
And it ruins so many
personal relationships.
And you look at what goes on
internationally, the Cold War.
For years, two big
nations saying,
if I make you feel more
threatened, more vulnerable,
you'll be nice to us
and won't attack us.
It doesn't work.
What's happening
in the world with,
whether it's the quote,
"War Against Terrorism,"
or whatever it is, it's
all the time people
doing this trying to
hurt the other people.
We think if we hurt other
people, they'll be nice to us.
It's stupid, but
that's what we do.
The way out of it
is what I think
all the great teachers
have recognized
is give the other
person what they want.
It's how do you say things so
that the other person feels
respected, they feel cared for?
The Buddha said if you can't
say something in such a way
that the other person feels
respected and loved, hold on.
Wait until you can say it.
And I think that is
the essential message.
That, for me, is kindness.
Being kind is caring for
how the other person feels.
If we do that,
everything changes.
When I do that in
my relationships--
when I'm in a
relationship with somebody
and we have the
agreement between us
that our intention is
that whatever we do,
we want the other person to
feel loved, at ease, respected,
everything changes.
First of all, I mean, I'll fail.
There'll be times when
I'm niggled and irritated
and I'll say something mean.
But then it's like, I'm sorry.
I didn't mean to.
Or what was it I
said that upset you?
Maybe I can learn not
to use those words.
Or there's a button
there I pressed.
Whatever it is, we can learn how
to be more loving, more kind.
And when you do that, you find
this incredible thing happens.
This new sort of love
begins to enter the world,
begins to enter your life,
enter your relationships.
It's not the love of I love
you, sort of that passionate,
whatever it is love.
It's just this context of
just lovingness that is there.
>>Peter has written
a wide range of books
that address this powerful but
delicate time in which we live,
from "The Global Brain Awakens,"
to "The Creative Manager,"
which is a guide to doing
business in a conscious way.
Check out his website
for more information
by clicking on the
link next to his name.
Until next time,
thanks for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]